Prince Andrew was standing before her, 
saying something to her with a look of tender 
solicitude. She, having raised her head, w-is 
looking up at him, flushed and evidently try- 
ing to master her rapid breathing. And the 
bright glow of some inner fire that had been 
suppressed was again alight in her. She was 
completely transformed and from a plain girl 
had again become what she had been at the 
ball. 

Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the 
latter noticed a new and youthful expression 
in his friend's face. 

Pierre changed places several times during 
the game, sitting now with his back to Natdsha 
and now facing her, but during the whole of 
the six rubbers he watched her and his friend. 

"Something very important is happening be- 
tween them," thought Pierre, and a feeling that 
was both joyful and painful agitated him and 
made him neglect the game. 

After six rubbers the general got up, saying 
that it was no use playing like that, and Pierre 
was released. Natdsha on one side was talking 
with S6nya and Boris, and Ve*ra with a subtle 
smile was saying something to Prince Andrew. 
Pierre went up to his friend and, asking wheth- 
er they were talking secrets, sat down beside 
them. Vra, having noticed Prince Andrew's 
attentions to Natdsha, decided that at a party, 



BOOK SIX 



265 



a real evening party, subtle allusions to the 
tender passion were absolutely necessary and, 
seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was 
alone, began a conversation with him about 
feelings in general and about her sister. With 
so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince 
Andrew to be, she felt that she had to employ 
her diplomatic tact. 

When Pierre went up to them he noticed 
that Vera was being carried away by her self- 
satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed 
embarrassed, a thing that rarely happened with 
him. 

"What do you think?" Wra was saying with 
an arch smile. "You are so discerning, Prince, 
and understand people's characters so well at 
a glance. What do you think of Natalie? Could 
she be constant in her attachments? Could she, 
like other women" (Vra meant herself), "love 
a man once for all and remain true to him for- 
ever? That is what I consider true love. What 
do you think, Prince?" 

"I know your sister too little," replied Prince 
Andrew, with a sarcastic smile under which he 
wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able 
to solve so delicate a question, and then I have 
noticed that the less attractive a woman is the 
more constant she is likely to be," he added, 
and looked up at Pierre who was just approach- 
ing them. 

"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," con- 
tinued Wra mentioning "our days" as peo- 
ple of limited intelligence are fond of doing, 
imagining that they have discovered and ap- 
praised the peculiar! ties of "our days" and that 
human characteristics change with the times 
"in our days a girl has so much freedom that 
the pleasure of being courted often stifles real 
feeling in her. And it must be confessed that 
Natalie is very susceptible." This return to the 
subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to 
knit his brows with discomfort: he was about 
to rise, but Wra continued with a still more 
subtle smile: 

"I think no one has been more courted than 
she," she went on, "but till quite lately she nev- 
er cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, 
Count," she said to Pierre, "even our dear cous- 
in Boris, who, between ourselves, was very far 
gone in the land of tenderness . . ." (alluding 
to a map of love much in vogue at that time). 

Prince Andrew frowned and remained si- 
lent. 

"You are friendly with Bods, aren't you?" 
asked V6ra. 

"Yes, I know him. ..." 



"I expect he has told you of his childish love 
for Natasha?" 

"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked 
Prince Andrew, blushing unexpectedly. 

"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy 
often leads to love. Le cousinage est un dan- 
gereux voisinage* Don't you think so?" 

"Oh , undoubtedly I " said Prince Andrew, and 
with sudden and unnatural liveliness he began 
chaffing Pierre about the need to be very care- 
ful with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and 
in the midst of these jesting remarks he rose, 
taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside. 

"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's 
strange animation with surprise, and noticing 
the glance he turned on Natisha as he rose. 

"I must ... I must have a talk with you," 
said Prince Andrew. "You know that pair of 
women's gloves?" (He referred to the ftf asonic 
gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to 
present to the woman he loved.) "I ... but no, 
I will talk to you later on," and with a strange 
light in his eyes and restlessness in his move- 
ments, Prince Andrew approached Natdsha 
and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince 
Andrew asked her something and how she 
flushed as she replied. 

But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and 
began insisting that he should take part in an 
argument between the general and the colonel 
on the affairs in Spain. 

Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of 
pleasure never left his face. The party was very 
successful and quite like other parties he had 
seen. Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle 
talk, the cards, the general raising his voice at 
the card table, and the samovar arid the tea 
cakes; only one thing was lacking that he had al- 
ways seen at the evening parties he wished to 
imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversa- 
tion among the men and a dispute about some- 
thing important and clever. Now the general 
had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew 
Pierre to it. 

CHAPTER XXII 

NEXT DAY, having been invited by the count, 
Prince Andrew dined with the Rost6vs and 
spent the rest of the day there. 

Everyone in the house realized for whose 
sake Prince Andrew came, and without con- 
cealing it he tried to be with Natdsha all day. 
Not only in the soul of the frightened yet hap- 
py and enraptured Natisha, but in the whole 
house, there was a feeling of awe at something 

1 "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighbor hood." 



266 



WAR AND PEACE 



important that was bound to happen. The 
countess looked with sad and sternly serious 
eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Na- 
tdsha and timidly started some artificial con- 
versation about trifles as soon as he looked her 
way. S6nya was afraid to leave NatAsha and 
afraid of being in the way when she was with 
them, Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expec- 
tation, when she remained alone with him for 
a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by his 
timidity. She felt that he wanted to say some- 
thing to her but could not bring himself to do 
so. 

In the evening, when Prince Andrew had 
left, the countess went up to Natdsha and 
whispered: "Well, what?" 

"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me 
anything now! One can't talk about that," said 
Natdsha. 

But all the same that night Natdsha, now 
agitated and now frightened, lay a long time in 
her mother's bed gazing straight before her. 
She told her how he had complimented her, 
how he told her he was going abroad, asked her 
where they were going to spend the summer, 
and then how he had asked her about Boris. 

"But such a ... such a ... never happened 
to me before!" she said. "Only I feel afraid in 
his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with 
him. What does that mean? Does it mean that 
it's the real thing? Yes? Mamma, are you 
asleep?" 

"No, my love; I am frightened myself," an- 
swered her mother. "Now go!" 

"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, 
to sleep! Mummy! Mummy! such a thing never 
happened to me before," she said, surprised 
and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in 
herself. "And could we ever have thought! . . ." 

It seemed to Natdsha that even at the time 
she first saw Prince Andrew at Otradnoe she 
had fallen in love with him. It was as if she 
feared this strange, unexpected happiness of 
meeting again the very man she had then cho- 
sen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) 
and of finding him, as it seemed, not indiffer- 
ent to her. 

"And it had to happen that he should come 
specially to Petersburg while we are here. And 
it had to happen that we should meet at that 
ball. It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything 
led up to this! Already then, directly I saw him 
I felt something peculiar." 

"What else did he say to you? What are those 
verses? Read them . . ." said her mother, 
thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince 



Andrew had written in Natdsha's album. 

"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his 
being a widower?" 

"Don't, Natdshal Pray to God. 'Marriages 
are made in heaven,' " said her mother. 

"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How hap- 
py I am!" cried Natdsha, shedding tears of joy 
and excitement and embracing her mother. 

At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting 
with Pierre and telling him of his love for Na- 
tdsha and his firm resolve to make her his wife. 

That day Countess Hlene had a reception 
at her house. The French ambassador was there, 
and a foreign prince of the blood who had of 
late become a frequent visitor of hers, and 
many brilliant ladies and gentlemen. Pierre, 
who had come downstairs, walked through the 
rooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied, 
absent-minded, and morose air. 

Since the ball he had felt the approach of a 
fit of nervous depression and had made desper- 
ate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of 
his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had un- 
expectedly been made a gentleman of the bed- 
chamber, and from that time he had begun to 
feel oppressed and ashamed in court society, 
and dark thoughts of the vanity of all things 
human came to him oftener than before. At 
the same time the feeling he had noticed be- 
tween his protge*e Natasha and Prince An- 
drew accentuated his gloom by the contrast be- 
tween his own position and his friend's. He 
tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife, 
and about Natasha and Prince Andrew; and 
again everything seemed to him insignificant 
in comparison with eternity; again the ques- 
tion: for what? presented itself; and he forced 
himself to work day and night at Masonic la- 
bors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that 
threatened him. Toward midnight, after he 
had left the countess' apartments, he was sit- 
ting upstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copy- 
ing out the original transactions of the Scottish 
lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room 
cloudy with tobacco smoke, when someone 
came in. It was Prince Andrew. 

"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccu- 
pied, dissatisfied air. "And I, you see, am hard 
at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with 
that air of escaping from the ills of life with 
which unhappy people look at their work. 

Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic ex- 
pression of renewed life on his face, paused in 
front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look, 
smiled at him with the egotism of joy. 

"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell 



BOOK 

you about it yesterday and I have come to do 
so today. I never experienced anything like it 
before. I am in love, my friend!" 

Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and 
dumped his heavy person down on the sofa be- 
side Prince Andrew. 

"With Natdsha Rost6va, yes?" said he. 

"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should 
never have believed it, but the feel ing is strong- 
er than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and 
suffered, but I would not exchange even that 
torment for anything in the world, I have not 
lived till now. At last I live, but I can't live 
without her! But can she love me? ... I am too 
old for her. . . . Why don't you speak?" 

"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre sud- 
denly, rising and beginning to pace up and 
down the room. "I always thought it. ... That 
girl is such a treasure . . . she is a rare girl. . . . 
My dear friend, I entreat you, don't philoso- 
phize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry. . . . 
And I am sure there will not be a happier man 
than you." 

"But what of her?" 

"She loves you." 

"Don't talk rubbish . . ." said Prince An- 
drew, smiling and looking into Pierre's eyes. 

"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely. 

"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, 
holding him by the arm. "Do you know the 
condition I am in? I must talk about it to some- 
one." 

"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said 
Pierre, and his face really changed, his brow be- 
came smooth, and he listened gladly to Prince 
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, 
quite a different, quite a new man. Where was 
his spleen, his contempt for life, his disillusion- 
ment? Pierre was the only person to whom he 
made up his mind to speak openly; and to him 
he told all that was in his soul. Now he boldly 
and lightly made plans for an extended future, 
said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to 
his father's caprice, and spoke of how he would 
either make his father consent to this marriage 
and love her, or would do without his consent; 
then he marveled at the feeling that had mas- 
tered him as at something strange, apart from 
and independent of himself. 

"1 should not have believed anyone who 
told me that I was capable of such love," said 
Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feel- 
ing that I knew in the past. The whole world is 
now for me divided into two halves: one half 
is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the oth- 
er half is everything where she is not, and there 



SIX 267 

all is gloom and darkness. . . ." 

"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: 
"yes, yes, I understand that." 

"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my 
fault. And I am very happy! You understand 
me? I know you are glad for my sake." 

"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his 
friend with a touched and sad expression in 
his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot ap- 
peared to him, the gloomier seemed his own. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

PRINCE ANDREW needed his father's consent to 
his marriage, and to obtain this he started for 
the country next day. 

His father received his son's communication 
with external composure, but inward wrath. 
He could not comprehend how anyone could 
wish to alter his life or introduce anythingnew 
into it, when his own life was already ending. 
"If only they would let me end my days as I 
want to," thought the old man, "then they 
might do as they please." With his son, how- 
ever, he employed the diplomacy he reserved 
for important occasions and, adopting a quiet 
tone, discussed the whole matter. 

In the first place the marriage was not a bril- 
liant one as regards birth, wealth, or rank. 
Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as 
young as he had been and his health was poor 
(the old man laid special stress on this), while 
she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son 
whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of 
a girl. "Fourthly and finally," the father said, 
looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put 
it off for a year: go abroad, take a cure, look 
out as you wanted to for a German tutor for 
Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion 
or obstinacy as you please is still as great, 
marry! And that's my last word on it. Mind, 
the last! . . ." concluded the prince, in a tone 
which showed that nothing would make him 
alter his decision. 

Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man 
hoped that his feelings, or his fianceVs, would 
not stand a year's test, or that he (the old prince 
himself) would die before then, and he de- 
cided to conform to his father's wishto pro- 
pose, and postpone the wedding for a year. 

Three weeks after the last evening he had 
spent with the Rost6vs, Prince Andrew re- 
turned to Petersburg. 

Next day after her talk with her mother Na- 
tdsha expected Bolk6nski all day, but he did 
not come. On the second and third day it was 



268 



WAR AND PEACE 



the same. Pierre did not come either and Na- 
tdsha, not knowing that Prince Andrew had 
gone to see his father, could not explain his ab- 
sence to herself. 

Three weeks passed in this way. Natdsha 
had no desire to go out any where and wandered 
from room to room like a shadow, idle and list- 
less; she wept secretly at night and did not go 
to her mother in the evenings. She blushed 
continually and was irritable. It seemed to her 
that everybody knew about her disappoint- 
ment and was laughing at her and pitying her. 
Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to 
her vanity intensified her misery. 

Once she came to her mother, tried to say 
something, and suddenly began to cry. Her 
tears were those of an offended child who does 
not know why it is being punished. 

The countess began to soothe Natdsha, who 
after first listening to her mother's words, sud- 
denly interrupted her: 

"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't 
want to think about ill He just came and then 
left off, left off. ..." 

Her voice trembled, and she again nearly 
cried, but recovered and went on quietly: 

"And I don't at all want to get married. And 
I am afraid of him; I have now become quite 
calm, quite calm." 

The day after this conversation Natdsha put 
on the old dress which she knew had the pecul- 
iar property of conducing to cheerfulness in 
the mornings, and that day she returned to the 
old way of life which she had abandoned since 
the ball. Having finished her morning tea she 
went to the ballroom, which she particularly 
liked for its loud resonance, and began singing 
her solfeggio. When she had finished her first 
exercise she stood still in the middle of the 
room and sang a musical phrase that particu- 
larly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as 
though she had not expected it) to the charm 
of the notes reverberating, filling the whole 
empty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and 
all at once she felt cheerful. "What's the good 
of making so much of it? Things are nice as it 
is," she said to herself, and she began walking 
up and down the room, not stepping simply 
on the resounding parquet but treading with 
each step from the heel to the toe (she had on 
a new and favorite pair of shoes) and listening 
to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the 
toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her 
own voice. Passing a mirror she glanced into 
it. "There, that's mel" the expression of her 
face seemed to say as she caught sight of her- 



self. "Well, and very nice too! I need nobody." 

A footman wanted to come in to clear away 
something in the room but she would not let 
him, and having closed the door behind him 
continued her walk. That morning she had re- 
turned to her favorite moodlove of, and de- 
light in, herself. "How charming that Natdsha 
isl" she said again, speaking as some third, col- 
lective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice, 
young, and in nobody's way if only they leave 
her in peace." But however much they left her 
in peace she could not now be at peace, and im- 
mediately felt this. 

In the hall the porch door opened, and some- 
one asked, "At home?" and then footsteps were 
heard. Natdsha was looking at the mirror, but 
did not see herself. She listened to the sounds 
in the hall. When she saw herself, her face was 
pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, 
though she hardly heard his voice through the 
closed doors. 

Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the draw- 
ing room. 

"Mamma! Bolk6nski has come!" she said. 
"Mamma, it is awful, it is unbearable! I don't 
want ... to be tormented! What am I to 
do? . . ." 

Before the countess could answer, Prince 
Andrew entered the room with an agitated and 
serious face. As soon as he saw Natdsha his face 
brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and 
Natasha's, and sat down beside the sofa. 

"It is long since we had the pleasure . . ." be- 
gan the countess, but Prince Andrew inter- 
rupted her by answering her intended ques- 
tion, obviously in haste to say what he had to. 

"I have not been to see you all this time be- 
cause I have been at my father's. I had to talk 
over a very important matter with him. I only 
got back last night," he said glancing at Na- 
tdsha; "I want to have a talk with you, Count- 
ess," he added after a moment's pause. 

The countess lowered her eyes, sighing 
deeply. 

"I am at your disposal," she murmured. 

Natdsha knew that she ought to go away, 
but was unable to do so: something gripped 
her throat, and regardlessof manners she stared 
straight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes. 

"At once? This instant! . . . No, it can't be!" 
she thought. 